---
---

# Exploratory data analysis of environmental conditions and marathon performance

### Background

This project is a collaboration with Dr. Brett Romano Ely and Dr.
Matthew Ely from the Department of Health Sciences at Providence
College. The report explores the relationship between environmental
conditions and marathon performance. There's well documented sex
difference between marathon performance and their response to
environmental conditions. Age difference in marathon performance and
their response to environmental conditions is also shown in previous
studies. The data used in this analysis was collected from the 5 major
marathons (Boston, Chicago, NYC, Twin Cities, and Grandma's).

### Methods

In this exploratory data analysis, the goal is to investigate (1) the
effects of increasing age on marathon performance in men and women, (2)
the impact of environmental conditions on marathon performance, and
whether the impact differs across age and gender, and (3) which weather
parameters (WBGT, Flag conditions, temperature, etc) that have the
largest impact on marathon performance.

### Results

The analysis reveals the influence of environmental conditions,
particularly black globe temperature, dry bulb temperature, wet bulb
temperature, and dew point, on marathon performance. The relationship
between WBGT and performance follows a U-shaped curve. Women experience
a more accelerated decline in marathon performance as they age compared
to men, especially in the 55-64 and 65+ age groups. The analysis also
shows older age groups are more sensitive to heat and humidity, and
therefore the impact of environmental conditions on marathon performance
differs across age groups.

## Files

### Report files

-   `marathon_analysis.qmd` - R quarto file that contains the code for
    exploratory data analysis, such as summary tables and
    visualizations.
-   `marathon.bib` - Bibliography citation for references in the report
-   `marathon_analysis.pdf` - PDF version of the exploratory analysis
    report; code appendix is also available at the end of the report

## Dependencies

The following packages are required to run the code in the R quarto
file:

-   library(tidyverse) - data manipulation

-   library(dplyr) - data manipulation

-   library(ggplot2) - visualization

-   library(kableExtra) - create nice table

-   library(gtsummary) - create table summary and statistics

-   library(lubridate) use to reformat dates
